DISCUSSION PAPER SERIES
IZA DP No. 16472
Hoseong Nam
Jonathan Portes
Migration and Productivity in the UK:  
An Analysis of Employee Payroll Data
SEPTEMBER 2023
Any opinions expressed in this paper are those of the author(s) and not those of IZA. Research published in this series may 
include views on policy, but IZA takes no institutional policy positions. The IZA research network is committed to the IZA 
Guiding Principles of Research Integrity.
The IZA Institute of Labor Economics is an independent economic research institute that conducts research in labor economics 
and offers evidence-based policy advice on labor market issues. Supported by the Deutsche Post Foundation, IZA runs the 
world’s largest network of economists, whose research aims to provide answers to the global labor market challenges of our 
time. Our key objective is to build bridges between academic research, policymakers and society.
IZA Discussion Papers often represent preliminary work and are circulated to encourage discussion. Citation of such a paper 
should account for its provisional character. A revised version may be available directly from the author.
Schaumburg-Lippe-Straße 5–9
53113 Bonn, Germany
Phone: +49-228-3894-0
Email: publications@iza.org www.iza.org
IZA – Institute of Labor Economics
DISCUSSION PAPER SERIES
ISSN: 2365-9793
IZA DP No. 16472
Migration and Productivity in the UK:  
An Analysis of Employee Payroll Data
SEPTEMBER 2023
Hoseong Nam
King’s College London
Jonathan Portes
King’s College London and IZA
ABSTRACT
IZA DP No. 16472 SEPTEMBER 2023
Migration and Productivity in the UK:  
An Analysis of Employee Payroll Data
We investigate the impact of immigration on productivity in the UK, using newly published 
ONS data on employees of non-UK origin by region and sector. Consistent with earlier 
research, we find some evidence of a positive association between non-EU migration and 
productivity, and some weaker evidence of a negative association between EU migration 
and productivity, although results are sensitive to the specifications used.
JEL Classification: F22, J48, J61, J68
Keywords: migration, productivity, labour markets, Brexit
Corresponding author:
Jonathan Portes
Department of Political Economy
King’s College
London
United Kingdom
Email: jonathan.portes@kcl.ac.uk
 
 
Introduction 
 
Productivity is the key driver of economic growth and welfare; as Paul Krugman (1997) put it, 
“productivity isn’t everything, but in the long run it is almost everything.”  The UK’s relatively 
poor economic performance since the 2008 financial crisis, and the resulting slow growth in 
overall living standards (and even slower growth in real wages) is largely the result of a sharp 
fall in productivity growth, which had averaged close to 2% per year prior to the crisis , to 
approximately 0.3% in the years after.   
 
Meanwhile, immigration to the UK rose sharply, beginning in 1997, and even further after 
2004, when the accession to the EU of new member states from central and Eastern Europe 
led both to a sharp rise in immigration and to a reorientation of migration flo ws to the UK 
away from historical source countries to the new EU member states, which increased further 
after the later accession of Bulgaria and Romania.  
 
While the  timing of the sharp fall in productivity does not match that of the increase in 
migration, the latter has been advanced by some as one possible cause of the productivity 
slowdown. This issue was brought into sharp focus by the Brexit referendum where the Leave 
campaign argued that freedom of movement had led to a large increase in lower skilled 
migration, which had depressed both UK wages and productivity growth, and that Brexit 
would enable the UK to reorient its migration system towards higher skilled workers, with an 
accompanying rise in productivity.   
 
The new points -based migration system, introduced in 2021, does indeed end freedom of 
movement; migrants are now eligible for work visas on the basis of salary, skill level and (in 
some cases) specific occupations.   However, even before it was introduced, there was a sharp 
fall in migration from the EU (and, during the pandemic, substantial return  migration) while 
migration from outside the EU rose steadily.   
 
The impact of migration – and in particular the differential impacts, depending on the type of 
worker – are therefore of substantial public and policy interest, both in assessing the likely 
impact of the new migration system and in determining what, if any , contribution migration 
policy can make towards addressing the UK’s productivity problem.  
 
Theoretical considerations 
 
The theoretical impact of immigration on productivity is ambiguous, because there are  a 
number of conceptually different mechanisms that are potentially at work. As discussed in 
Campo, Forte and Portes (2018), these include: 
 
• The simple “batting average” effect. If individual immigrants are more or less 
productive on average than natives, they will directly raise or lower productivity for 
the whole economy, or the particular locality or sector that they are employed in, even 
if they don’t affect the productivity of natives; 
 
• Within-firm complementarities, where immigrants increase the productivity of natives 
in the same firm (or, conceivably, reduce it, if for example there are increased frictions 
within the firm, perhaps because of language differences); 
 
• Within-sector spillovers, because of economies of scale, clustering effects, and/or 
increased competition; 
 
• Local or geographical effects, again because of complementarities – for example the 
availability of low-skilled immigrant workers could increase the productivity or labour 
supply of high skilled native workers (Barone and Mocetti, 2011; Peri, Romiti, and 
Rossi, 2015); 
 
• Incentive effects: immigration could increase or decrease the incentive for native 
workers to acquire human capital, either general or sector-specific, depending on the 
type of immigration and how it impacted wages and labour demand; 
 
• Impacts on investment. If immigration reduced the incentive to invest in productivity-
enhancing capital – perhaps the availability of low-skilled labour makes it uneconomic 
to invest in automation – then it could reduce productivity. On the other hand, 
someinvestment might be complementary to the skills of immigrants. 
 
It is worth listing and distinguishing these possible mechanisms, since they have different 
implications for empirical analysis. For example, if the impact of immigration on productivity 
operates primarily at a sectoral or firm level, then the definition o f the appropriate labour 
market in which to estimate the impacts will be different than if it operates at a geographical 
level. 
Literature Review  
 
In contrast to the labour market impacts on jobs and wages, for which there exists now an 
extensive literature, the evidence for the UK (or indeed internationally) on the impact of 
migration on productivity is has started to build up only recently. As a result, there is not as 
yet a clear consensus on either the sign or the magnitude of the possible impacts; 
nevertheless, it is worth reviewing the available empirical evidence on the topic. 
 
At a cross-country level, Ortega and Peri (2014) examine the impact of both immigration and 
trade on income: they find that while openness to trade and migration both boost per capita 
income, migration has considerably larger impacts than trade; moreover, the impact of 
migration takes place chiefly via a positive effect on  TFP. However, their cross -sectional 
dataset is dominated by developing countries. Taking a different approach, Alesina, Harnoss, 
and Rapoport (2016) analyse the relationship between birthplace diversity – which they show 
is unrelated to traditional measures of diversity – and macroeconomic performance, showing 
that economic output is positively related with diversity caused by immigration, with 
immigrants from richer and culturally proximate countries being associated with higher 
productive effects. 
 
Similarly, Jaumotte, Koloskova, and Saxena (2016) apply a similar specification to that of 
Ortega and Peri to a panel of selected countries, finding that a 1% increase in the migrant 
share of the adult population results in an increase in GDP per capita an d productivity of 
approximately 2 percent: this is a very large  impact. The findings are consistent across a 
variety of empirical specifications, although again the study analyses a limited dataset.  
 
Within countries, there exists a small but growing body of research looking at the relationship 
between immigration and labour productivity. For the US, Ottaviano and Peri (2006) find 
evidence of diversity positively affecting the productivity of workers i n major cities, going as 
far as stating that “data support the hypothesis of a positive productivity effect of diversity 
with causation running from diversity to productivity of US workers”  (p. 38) . Peri (2012) 
decomposes multiple components of output growth and estimates the impact of immigration 
on each, fin ding that immigration is consistently associated with increases in total factor 
productivity in excess of 1% (which is found to be sufficient to counteract the lower associated 
growth of skill intensity and skill bias of production).  
 
In the UK, Ottaviano, Peri, and Wright (2018) analyse the services sector and find that a 1% 
increase in immigrant inflow in the firms’ locality is associated with an increase in labour 
productivity within the firm. It is however worth noting that, for lack of more granular data, 
their strategy relies on matching firm -level data with immigrant population estimated at 
TTWA level from the Labour Force Survey, which can present significant measurement error. 
Using the same data sources, Rolfe et al. (2013) look at productivity by region and sector and, 
although they do not attempt to establish causality, they find immigrant share to be positively 
associated with labour productivity; additionally, they provide significant qualitative evidence 
of the complementarity between domestic and foreign workers. 
 
The most recent relevant research in this area was prepared for the UK government’s 
Migration Advisory Committee .  Campo et al. (2018) exploit geographical variation in the 
migrant share of the workforce, using an instrumental variable approach, to estimate the 
impact of immigration on productivity.  They find that a one percentage point increase in the 
share of immigrants within a UK local authority is associated with an almost three percentage 
point increase in productivity (measured as the growth in gros s value output per head over 
the period considered).  
 
Costas-Fernández (2018) assumes a CES production function and incorporates new estimates 
of the capital stock at a regional and sector level. The study finds that both migrants in high - 
and low -skilled occupations are, at the margin, more productive than t heir UK -born 
counterparts, with the central estimates suggesting that the marginal migrant is around 2.5 
times as productive as a UK -born worker. Finally, Smith (2018) also looks at a region -sector 
level, but the key dependent variable is total factor prod uctivity (TFP) rather than labour 
productivity; she also uses firm -level data and imposes less structure on the production 
function. The central estimate is that a one percentage point increase in the migrant share 
results in a 1.6 per cent increase in TFP.  
 
Summarising the results, the MAC concluded: “Overall the existing literature and the studies 
we commissioned point towards immigration having a positive impact on productivity but the 
results are subject to significant uncertainty. While the evidence on ov erall migration is not 
entirely conclusive the evidence perhaps unsurprisingly suggests that high -skilled migrants 
have a more positive impact” (Migration Advisory Committee, 2018, p. 2). 
 
Overall, the message from these papers is that the impact of immigration on productivity is 
generally positive, but effect sizes are likely to vary depend both on the nature of the 
economy and labour market and that of the immigrant workforce. 
 
. 
Data description 
 
We require data both on productivity and employment disaggregated between migrants and 
non-migrants.  For the latter, existing empirical analysis in the UK has almost exclusively made 
use of the Labour Force Survey (and/or the related Annual Population Survey), the main 
regular UK household survey used for labour market analysis, and the source of official figures 
on employment.  The Labour Force Survey incl udes a question on country of birth, enabling 
the identification of migrants.  The analyses described above therefore construct variables 
showing migrant penetration of the workforce; this is the key explanatory variable. 
 
However, while the LFS is the standard data source for this type of analysis over a range of 
labour market issues, sample sizes are not large when it come s to migrants  – especially 
outside London.  This issue is particularly acute when looking at (as we do) data by region and 
sector, where some region-sectors outside London will have very few migrants in any given 
quarterly (or even annual) sample.  All the UK-focused papers above suffer from this limitation. 
 
Our analysis, by contrast, makes no use of the LFS . Instead, we use a new experimental data 
set from HM Revenue and Customs' (HMRC). HMRC publish data on migrant workers from 
the Pay As You Earn (PAYE) Real Time Information (RTI) system.  Unlike the LFS, it covers the 
whole population rather than a sample; it is based on a count of all payrolled emp loyee jobs 
that were active in a given month using HMRC's PAYE RTI data.  This information is then 
combined with the HMRC Migrant Worker Scan (MWS).  This uses input from the Department 
for Work and Pensions (DWP) which registers National Insurance numbers for those aged over 
16 years through its adult registration process, which usually includes an interview to verify 
identity and right to residency in the UK.   
 
Combining this information allows the data to be disaggregated between those who were 
either born in the UK or arrived here before the age of 16, and those who were registered as 
adults. Within that, the published data disaggregates between those who are of EU origin and 
those from outside the EU.  The data is therefore divided into three groups – EU origin 
employees, non -EU original employees, and UK -origin employees, where the latter also 
includes those born abroad but who moved here before the age of (ap proximately) 16.  The 
data is reported at the region and industry level and is available from 2014 to 2022. 
 
For labour productivity, we use  the “Labour productivity by Industry and Region”  dataset, 
published by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) . The dataset contains information on 
labour productivity per job and per hour , reported again at the region -industry level, and is 
available up to calendar year 2019; it has not been reported since the pandemic.   
 
We merge the two datasets  by region, industr ial sector , and year, the three categorical 
variables they have in common. The datasets classify regions by International Territorial Level 
(ITL) 1 system and industries  by the Standard Industry Classification (SIC) 2007 codes.  The 
ONS dataset aggregates a number of sectors; we aggregate the HMRC data to match.  
 
We also exclude the real estate sector: in this particular dataset, ONS assign the value of 
“imputed rent” , that is the o utput produced by homeowners ‘paying’ themselves rent for 
their residence, to this sector, which results in a large upward distortion.  The HMRC data is 
reported monthly; we use annual averages  to match the productivity data. This produces a 
dataset with 12 regions, 6 industries and  6 years , i.e.  1152 observations, each of which 
contains information about employment counts by  origin (UK, EU, and non -EU) and 
productivity per job and per hour worked. 
 
Descriptive Statistics 
 
Figure 1 shows trends in productivity over the 2014-2019 period by sector. Productivity varies 
significantly between sectors, with output per job (in 2019) ranging from £114,000 in finance 
to £24,000 in accommodation and food services. And while, as noted above, productivity was 
on average stagnant over this pe riod overall, there was substantial divergence between 
sectors, with productivity in information and communication, growin by 20% over 2014-2019. 
Conversely, productivity in public services only grew by 0.83%, and transportation shrank by 
11% in the same period.  Interestingly, we find that t he productivity growth and levels of 
productivity show a weak but positive correlation of 0.10, suggesting that high-output sectors 
tend to grow more both in absolute and relative terms. This factor is explored in greater detail 
in our regression analysis.  
 
 
Figure 1 
 
Figure 2 summarises the geographical trends in productivity. There is significant variance in 
productivity by regio n, a lbeit less pronounced than sectoral differences.  Unsurprisingly, 
London is by far the most productive region in the UK with average output of £78,600 per job, 
followed by the South-East at £59 ,600; the lowest productivity regions were Wales and 
Yorkshire and the Humber .  Amongst regions, w e find a slight positive correlation between 
growth rates and levels of productivity, suggesting some small increasing regional divergence. 
 

 
Figure 2 
 
Figures 3 and 4 provide an overview of the trend s in migrant penetration across sectors.  By 
the end of the period, EU-origin migrants made up about 8.6% of the workforce, up from 6.6% 
at the start, while non-EU migrants were 6.7% of the workforce, up from 5.95%.   EU migrants 
were particularly concentrated in accommodation and service activities, administrative and 
support service  activities, and manufacturing.   By contrast, sectors with the highest 
proportion of non -EU nationals included information and communications sector at 10.3%, 
followed by accommodation and food service, human health and social work, administrative 
and support service activities.  So while there are considerable overlaps, non-EU migrants are 
overrepresented in some higher -skilled, higher productivity sectors whereas the reverse is 
true for EU migrants.  
 

 
Figure 3 
 
 
 
Figure 4 
 
 

Both EU and non-EU migrants are, however, very much concentrated in the London area. 
Figure 5 reveals that  EU and non -EU migrants, in roughly equal parts, made up 38.5% of 
London’s workforce in 2019 . In all other regions except for the North-East, EU migrants 
outnumber non-EU migrants.  
 
. 
 
 
Figure 5 

 
Figure 6 
 
 
Before proceeding to the regression analysis, we look at the simple correlation between 
changes in productivity and changes in migrant penetration. Figures 7 and 8 show the 
correlation between changes in the proportion of workers of EU origin and productivity, first 
by industry sector, and then  by sector-region over the entire period of our dataset (2014 to 
2019); the latter plots all 192 sector -region observations used for the correlation  while the 
former displays average changes in each industry.  A small negative correlation is observed, 
although there is substantial heterogeneity.  
 
Similarly, figures 9 and 10 do the same  for non-EU origin workers. Here the correlation is 
positive, and somewhat stronger.  These are simple associations but  suggest that at an 
aggregate level there is some negative association between productivity growth and EU 
migration, and positive association for non -EU migrants, which we investigate further in the 
next section. 
 

 
Figure 7 
 
Figure 8 
 

 
Figure 9 
 
 
Figure 10 
 
 

Regression results 
 
The descriptive analysis above shows some evidence of a positive association between non -
EU origin migrants and productivity, and the reverse for EU -origin migrants. We proceed to 
investigate this more formally, by regressing productivity at the region-sector level on migrant 
penetration in the workforce, disaggregated between EU and non -EU origin worker s. Our 
dependent variable in each case is (real) output per worker (ONS also published output per 
hour; in our data, the correlation between output per worker and output per hour is 
extremely strong, and using the latter makes effectively no difference to the results).  The key 
independent variables are the percentage of the workforce made up of EU and non-EU origin 
workers. 
 
As for the impact of migration on wages, there are two potential approaches here seen in the 
literature; to regress the *level* of productivity on migrant penetration, with the lagged value 
of productivity as a control, and with region, sector and time fixed effects (as in, for example, 
Nickell and Salaheen  (2017)); or to perform the same regression in first differences, which 
removes the need for region and sector fixed effects (as in, for example, Dustmann , Frattini 
and Preston). There is no clear reason to prefer one or the other – which is more appropriate 
will likely depend on the structure of the errors: see Woolridge (2010). We do both.  
 
For the latter approach, we also control for lagged productivity growth; the coefficient here 
is negative and significant, suggesting some negative autocorrelation (this could well reflect 
measurement error in productivity); and for the growth in total employment, again negative, 
suggesting that sectors where the workforce is growing faster see somewhat slower 
productivity growth. However, while we think this justified their inclusion, it doesn’t actually 
change the results significantly (i .e., excluding these variables does not materially alter the 
estimated coefficients on our variables of interest). We also show results weighted by total 
employment, since the size of sectors (and to a lesser extent regions) varies significantly. 
 
Our results show a reasonably clear association between non -EU origin migration and 
productivity. For both the levels and the first differences regression, the coefficient suggests 
that an “extra” 1% of the workforce from outside the EU is associated with an approximately 
3% increase in productivity in the non-weighted regression, and an approximately 1.5% in the 
weighted regression, although for the first difference regression this latter is not significant 
at the 5% level. Combined with the graphs above, this appears to be reasonably strong 
evidence of an association, although, as discussed below, we need to be cautious about 
claiming causality. 
.  
 
Column (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
Dependent Variable logProductivityperjob ∆Productivityperjob 
Fixed effects No Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Weighted No No Yes No Yes 
Explanatory 
Variable 
     
EUEmployment% -.03339     
.0446 
-.37139    
.36146 
-.04018    
.27762 
  
nonEUEmployment
% 
.07858    
.05762 
2.96091**
*    
.88079 
1.47134**
*    
.52783 
  
∆EUEmployment%    -.7041707    
.5888755 
-.0175677    
.4453118 
∆nonEUEmploymen
t% 
   3.092276*
*    
1.348519 
1.369535*    
.8201292 
L1.Productivityperjo
b 
.9927001*
**    
.0047749 
.3187454*
**     
.033791 
.3700014*
**     
.033495 
  
L1.∆Productivityperj
ob 
   -.121919*
**     
.035562 
-.1340132*
**    
.0358669 
∆Totalemployment
% 
   -.2146397
*    
.1297999 
-.1947434*    
.1133202 
      
Cons .0800037    
.0513989 
7.222974*
**    
.3624533 
6.691561*
**    
.3602099 
.3428495    
.5783661 
.3668363    
.4115159 
R-squared 0.9785 0.5584 0.8377 0.0287 0.0346 
Adjusted R-squared 0.9784   0.0197 0.0257 
Table 1. Regression results 
 
The results for EU -origin migrants are less clear. The coefficient estimates are consistently 
negative, consistent with the descriptive statistics shown above. However, the estimates 
never approach statistical significance , and are quite small, especially when weights are 
applied. So while, taken together, the results may constitute suggestive evidence of an 
association between EU -origin migration and slower productivity growth, they are also 
consistent with a null effect overall. 
 
As with the more common analyses of the impact of migration on wages, an obvious objection 
to the regressions above is that migration patters may be endogeneous; that is, that changes 
in productivity may drive migration rather than vice versa. However, the  assumption that 
migration is exogeneous to productivity is rather less problematic than for wages: it is not 
obvious whether a sector where productivity is growing fast would need, or attract, more or 
fewer migrant workers (note that we control for employment growth overall).  
 
The standard approach in the literature to this issue is to instrument migrant penetration (or 
changes in migrant penetration), generally using some measure of pre -existing migrant 
penetration as an instrument.  Unfortunately, this is problematic when using panel data over 
a relatively short time period, as here; we did experiment with this approach, finding broadly 
similar results, but given the weakness and questionable validity of the instrument here, this 
is not wholly convincing; we would still prefer to describe our results as indicating an 
association (or lack of association) rather than clear evidence of causality.   
Interpretation and policy implications 
 
The differential impacts of EU and non-EU migration could perhaps be most directly ascribed 
to the heterogeneous skillsets and sectoral distributions between the two migrant groups, 
shaped by the different nationality-based entry requirements to the UK during 2014-2019. In 
this period, EU-origin migrants could enter and work in the UK under the free movement 
system, while  non-EU origin migrants moving to work had to qualify under a relatively 
restrictive system, which generally required a job offer paying significantly more than average 
earnings in a relatively highly skilled occupation.   
 
So the most obvious intuitive explanation is simply a batting average effect – that is, that 
recent non-EU origin migrants are more highly skilled/highly paid, and hence more productive, 
than EU-origin migrants (or UK-origin workers). However, this explanation is not likely in itself 
to be sufficient. In fact, by no means all non-EU origin migrants in the workforce enter through 
the selective work visa system: there are also large migration flows through other routes, 
including students, refugees, “family” migration, and dependents. Most of these have the 
right to work (with some restrictions for students).   
 
As a consequence, there is substantial heterogeneity among non-EU origin employees. While 
it is the case that median pay is somewhat higher for non -EU origin migrants than for UK -
origin workers, which in turn is somewhat higher than for EU -origin workers, the differences 
are not huge, and indeed there are large numbers of non -EU origin emp loyees in relatively 
low wages (Fernández-Reino and Rienzo, 2021). Interestingly, recent analysis using a related 
version of the same data set (Sumption, Portes and Brindle, 2023) found that the earnings of 
non-EU workers first entering the employee workforce increased from the mid-2010s to 2021 
(relative to both UK and EU-origin workers), suggesting that the average skills profile of non-
EU migration increased over this period, at the same time as their overall numbers increased 
rapidly. However, the association of non -EU origin employees with increased productivity is 
far larger than can be explained simply by the batting average effect.   In other words, our 
results imply that the workforce as a whole sees higher productivity growth in sectors and 
regions where the non-EU origin workforce is growing faster ; no such impact (and, possibly, 
the reverse) is the case for EU-origin employees.  
 
There are a number of possible explanations for this observed association.  While our 
econometric specifications (fixed effect regressions or first differences) abstract from fixed 
sector-region effects, it may still be the case that employers respond to  local sector-specific 
shocks in ways which drive a correlation between productivity growth and non-EU migration 
(for example, if high growth/high productivity firms rely more on non -EU migrants, non -EU 
migrants are more likely to set up or join high -growth firms, or the presence of a pool of 
available non-EU migrants makes it easier for firms to grow faster).  
 
.Any of these could plausibly play a role in the positive association of non -EU migration and 
productivity.  As discussed above, we do not claim to have established causality in our analysis 
above, and indeed these explanations are largely consistent with causality running in both 
directions.  
 
What are the implications of our results for the impact of the post-Brexit migration system 
introduced in January 2021? As noted above and discussed in detail in Portes and Springford 
(2023) and UK in a Changing Europe (2023), this has further accent uated the rise in non -EU 
migration for work.  In the latest available data (Office for National Statistics, 2023) there was 
a sharp rise in the number of non -EU origin employees, up by 494,000 (or 26.6%) in 2022 
compared to 2019, while EU-origin employee numbers were down by more than 150,000. 
 
In principle, if our results continue to hold in the post-pandemic period, this should provide a 
modest boost to UK productivity over time.  It would also appear to justify the broad rationale 
for the new system, which ends free movement while liberalising work migration more 
broadly for relatively highly paid/highly skilled workers.   
 
 However, it is worth noting that much of the recent growth in non -EU migration is in the 
health and social care sector and has been driven in large part by the introduction of a new 
Health and Care Visa, which is open to employees in even relatively low-paid roles. There has 
also been a very large rise in the number of dependents arriving , particularly accompanying 
those on student visas and many of whom are likely to be working.  It cannot therefore be 
assumed that the previous association between productivity at a sector-region level holds for 
the changing composition of non-EU migration.  
 
 
 
 
 
Reference 
 
Alesina, A., Harnoss, J. and Rapoport, H., 2016. Birthplace diversity and economic prosperity. 
Journal of Economic Growth, 21, pp.101-138. 
 
Brindle, B., Portes, J. and Sumption, M., 2023.  Upward mobility? Earnings trajectories for 
recent immigrants .  Migration Observatory briefing, COMPAS, University of Oxford . 
Available at:  https://migrationobservatory.ox.ac.uk/resources/commentaries/upward-
mobility-earnings-trajectories-for-recent-immigrants/ (Accessed 23 September 2023).  
 
Campo, F., Forte, G. and Portes, J., 2018. The impact of migration on productivity and native-
born workers' training. 
 
Costas-Fernandez, J., 2018. Examining the Link between Migration and Productivity. Report 
for the Migration Advisory Committee. 
 
Dustmann, C., Frattini, T. and Preston, I.P., 2013. The effect of immigration along the 
distribution of wages. Review of Economic Studies, 80(1), pp.145-173. 
 
Fernández-Reino, M. and Rienzo, C., 2021. Migrants in the UK labour market: An overview. 
Migration Observatory briefing, COMPAS, University of Oxford. Available at: 
https://migrationobservatory.ox.Ac.uk/resources/briefings/migrants-in-the-uk-labour-market-
an-overview (Accessed: 5 September 2023). 
 
 
HM Revenue & Customs (2023). ‘UK payrolled  employments by nationality, region and 
industry, from July 2014 to June 2021’. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/payrolled-employments-in-the-uk-by-region-
industry-and-nationality-from-july-2014-to-june-2021 (Accessed: 5 September 2023). 
 
Jaumotte, M.F., Koloskova, K. and Saxena, M.S.C., 2016. Impact of migration on income 
levels in advanced economies. International Monetary Fund. 
 
Krugman, P.R., 1997. The age of diminished expectations: US economic policy in the 1990s . 
MIT press. 
 
Migration Advisory Committee, 2018. EEA migration in the UK: Final report. Migration 
Advisory Committee. 
 
Nickell, S. and Saleheen, J., 2017. The impact of EU and Non -EU immigration on British 
wages. IZA Journal of Development and Migration, 7(1), pp.1-28. 
 
Office for National Statistics (2021). ‘Region by industry labour productivity ’. Available at: 
https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/economicoutputandproductivity/productivitymeasures/data
sets/industrybyregionlabourproductivity (Accessed: 5 September 2023). 
 
Office for National Statistics (2023). ‘Employments from Pay As  You Earn Real Time 
Information: ad hoc estimates of payrolled employees by NUTS1 region and nationality ’. 
Available at:  
https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/earningsandworkinghou
rs/datasets/employmentsfrompayasyouearnrealtimeinformationadhocestimatesofpayrolledem
ployeesbynuts1regionandnationalityseasonallyadjusted (Accessed: 5 September 2023). 
 
Ortega, F. and Peri, G., 2014. Openness and income: The roles of trade and migration. Journal 
of international Economics, 92(2), pp.231-251. 
 
Ottaviano, G.I. and Peri, G., 2006. The economic value of cultural diversity: evidence from US 
cities. Journal of Economic geography, 6(1), pp.9-44. 
 
Ottaviano, G.I., Peri, G. and Wright, G.C., 2018. Immigration, trade and productivity in 
services: Evidence from UK firms. Journal of International Economics, 112, pp.88-108. 
Peri, G., 2012. The effect of immigration on productivity: Evidence from US states. Review of 
Economics and Statistics, 94(1), pp.348-358. 
 
Portes, J. and Springford, J., 2023. The impact of the post-Brexit migration system on the UK 
labour market. Contemporary Social Science, 18(2), pp.132-149. 
 
Rolfe, H., Rienzo, C., Lalani, M. and Portes, J., 2013. Migration and productivity: employers’ 
practices, public attitudes and statistical evidence. National Institute of Economic and Social 
Research, 116. 
 
Smith, J., 2018. Migration Productivity and Firm Performance. Report for the Migration 
Advisory Committee. 
 
UK in a Changing Europe  (2023). Immigration after Brexit: where are we going? Available 
at:  
https://ukandeu.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/Immigration-after-Brexit-UKICE-and-
MigObs-2023.pdf (Accessed: 5 September 2023). 
 
Woolridge, J (2010).  Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data: Second Edition, 
MIT Press, Boston.  
 